ofss_dev_notes.md, before:

OpenFlow Soft Switch - Dev Notes
================================
This dev notes should be helpful to browse the source code of ofsoftswitch13 
while develpoment.


Datapath Design
==============
This is verbatim text from the email sent by Zoltan Lajos, Ericsson Research.

----------------Email Snip Start----------------
The switch is using regular packet/raw sockets. See this for an explanation: 
http://yusufonlinux.blogspot.hu/2010/11/data-link-access-and-zero-copy.html. 
This is essentially similar to using the libpcap library. But we already got 
this code (from the 1.0 switch), so we sticked with it. The netbee library is 
only used for parsing the packets: we give it a packet, it gives us back the 
list of fields/values in it; it is not used for the actual packet 
capture/sending.

The port creation in the in switch this is implemented here: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/lib/netdev.c#L720, the only 
difference is that in the switch we originally wanted to have an abstraction 
on top of native ports, that's why everything is being converted to the 
"netdev" structure. But under the hood these are just simple linux sockets.

Once the ports are up the switch goes into an infinite loop here: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/udatapath/udatapath.c#L177. 
This periodically calls dp_run, which in turn calls dp_ports_run: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/udatapath/datapath.c#L199. 
In this function we iterate over ports, and for each call the poll function: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/udatapath/dp_ports.c#L275. 
Again, netdev is just an abstraction on top of regular linux sockets, so here 
we simply call the recvfrom system function: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/lib/netdev.c#L976

By now we have the raw packet in a simple byte buffer (ofpbuf structure). If 
you follow the chain of calls, we will eventually call the packet_create 
function, to wrap this buffer with a packet structure that contains all the 
metadata. This calls into packet_handle_std_create, which in turn calls 
nblink_packet_parse to parse the packet for us: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/udatapath/packet_handle_std.c#L62

When this is all finished, we have received the packet from a port, parsed it, 
and created a packet structure that contains the original packet and the 
metadata fields. Then this is passed to the pipeline_process_packet function 
(https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/udatapath/dp_ports.c#L225), 
which is basically all the OpenFlow magic...
----------------Email Snip End----------------


Main Files and Functions
========================
```
utilities/dpctl.c
    Most of the functionality of the dpctl utility is implemented in this file.

    parse_match()
    Parses the incoming flow mod args in dpctl and puts them in a ofl_match 
    structure as OXM TLVs

    flow_mod()
    Handles the flow-mod command in dpctl. Prepares the ofl_msg_flow_mod msg 
    and sends it over the vconn.


udatapath/pipeline.c
    Most of the datapath implementation is contained within this file.

    pipeline_handle_flow_mod()
    Called in ofss upon receiving a flow_mod msg. Validates the action set
    and installs a flow in the flow table.

    flow_entry_create()
    Processes the flow_mod message and returns a flow_entry entry which is
    then inserted into the flow table.


    pipeline_process_packet()
    The datapath pipeline starts here. The netdev recveives a packet from one
    of the many dp ports and does some initial processing. It then adds bunch
    of metatdata on top of the received packet and the final packet is
    handed over to this function. It's responsible to initiate pipeline
    processing (i.e., table lookups) for the received packet.


udatapath/flow_table.c
    Controls the flow tables of the dp. Includes code to creation, update, 
    lookup, stats and deletion of flow tables.

    flow_table_lookup()
    Looksup the flow tables of a given table for a match against the incoming
    pkt. After basic sanity checks, calls the core packet matching routine and
    does some post processing such as stats updates.


udatapath/match_std.c
    Contains a whole bunch of match routines to match 8/16/32/48/64 bytes of a
    packet with and without match masks.

    packet_match()
    This is the core match check routine between and is called after couple of
    wraps from flow_table_lookup(). This takes the incming packet match fields
    and compares them with that of the flow table entry's match fields.
```


Main Data Structures
====================
```
struct ofl_msg_flow_mod
    Represents the flow_mod message. It contains the msg header, cookie, idle
    & hard timeouts, priority, match fields and instructions.

struct flow_table
    Represents the flow table. It's present in every table. It contains the
    table features, statistics, a list for match, hard and idle entries. 
    i.e., the flows are classified into 3 categories: idle, hard and regular
    match entries. This facilitates correct aging.

struct flow_entry
    Represents the actual flow. It contains pointers to the dp, table, stats, 
    instructions and match fields.

```


Writing New OF Experimenters
============================
In OpenFlow v1.3.0, vendor extensions has been renamed as expeimenters. OFSS 
allows developers to write their own experimenters. As given in OpenFlow spec,
an experimenter message contains three important parameters as follows:

```
/* Experimenter extension. */
struct ofp_experimenter_header {
    struct ofp_header header;   /* Type OFPT_EXPERIMENTER   */
    uint32_t experimenter;      /* Experimenter ID          */
    uint32_t exp_type;          /* Experimenter defined     */
    
    /* Other experimenter-defined additional data.          */
};
OFP_ASSERT(sizeof(struct ofp_experimenter_header) == 16);
```

In OFSS, any experimenter has to register 4 routines with the dp engine and 
those routines will be called on the event of receiving a matching experimenter 
message. The routines are for:
    1. Message packing routine
    2. Message unpacking routine
    3. Message free routine
    4. Message to string routine

These routines can be registered at oflib-exp/ofl-exp.c file.

Commit message:

Added rudimentrary FPM OF experimenter data structures support.
This commit also includes:
     * Updates on dpctl dev in ofss_dev_notes.
     * Minor change to setup install script to include make and g++.

ofss_dev_notes.md, after:

OpenFlow Soft Switch - Dev Notes
================================
This dev notes should be helpful to browse the source code of ofsoftswitch13 
while develpoment.


Datapath Design
==============
This is verbatim text from the email sent by Zoltan Lajos, Ericsson Research.

----------------Email Snip Start----------------
The switch is using regular packet/raw sockets. See this for an explanation: 
http://yusufonlinux.blogspot.hu/2010/11/data-link-access-and-zero-copy.html. 
This is essentially similar to using the libpcap library. But we already got 
this code (from the 1.0 switch), so we sticked with it. The netbee library is 
only used for parsing the packets: we give it a packet, it gives us back the 
list of fields/values in it; it is not used for the actual packet 
capture/sending.

The port creation in the in switch this is implemented here: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/lib/netdev.c#L720, the only 
difference is that in the switch we originally wanted to have an abstraction 
on top of native ports, that's why everything is being converted to the 
"netdev" structure. But under the hood these are just simple linux sockets.

Once the ports are up the switch goes into an infinite loop here: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/udatapath/udatapath.c#L177. 
This periodically calls dp_run, which in turn calls dp_ports_run: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/udatapath/datapath.c#L199. 
In this function we iterate over ports, and for each call the poll function: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/udatapath/dp_ports.c#L275. 
Again, netdev is just an abstraction on top of regular linux sockets, so here 
we simply call the recvfrom system function: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/lib/netdev.c#L976

By now we have the raw packet in a simple byte buffer (ofpbuf structure). If 
you follow the chain of calls, we will eventually call the packet_create 
function, to wrap this buffer with a packet structure that contains all the 
metadata. This calls into packet_handle_std_create, which in turn calls 
nblink_packet_parse to parse the packet for us: 
https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/udatapath/packet_handle_std.c#L62

When this is all finished, we have received the packet from a port, parsed it, 
and created a packet structure that contains the original packet and the 
metadata fields. Then this is passed to the pipeline_process_packet function 
(https://github.com/CPqD/ofsoftswitch13/blob/master/udatapath/dp_ports.c#L225), 
which is basically all the OpenFlow magic...
----------------Email Snip End----------------


Main Files and Functions
========================
```
utilities/dpctl.c
    Most of the functionality of the dpctl utility is implemented in this file.

    parse_match()
    Parses the incoming flow mod args in dpctl and puts them in a ofl_match 
    structure as OXM TLVs

    flow_mod()
    Handles the flow-mod command in dpctl. Prepares the ofl_msg_flow_mod msg 
    and sends it over the vconn.


udatapath/pipeline.c
    Most of the datapath implementation is contained within this file.

    pipeline_handle_flow_mod()
    Called in ofss upon receiving a flow_mod msg. Validates the action set
    and installs a flow in the flow table.

    flow_entry_create()
    Processes the flow_mod message and returns a flow_entry entry which is
    then inserted into the flow table.


    pipeline_process_packet()
    The datapath pipeline starts here. The netdev recveives a packet from one
    of the many dp ports and does some initial processing. It then adds bunch
    of metatdata on top of the received packet and the final packet is
    handed over to this function. It's responsible to initiate pipeline
    processing (i.e., table lookups) for the received packet.


udatapath/flow_table.c
    Controls the flow tables of the dp. Includes code to creation, update, 
    lookup, stats and deletion of flow tables.

    flow_table_lookup()
    Looksup the flow tables of a given table for a match against the incoming
    pkt. After basic sanity checks, calls the core packet matching routine and
    does some post processing such as stats updates.


udatapath/match_std.c
    Contains a whole bunch of match routines to match 8/16/32/48/64 bytes of a
    packet with and without match masks.

    packet_match()
    This is the core match check routine between and is called after couple of
    wraps from flow_table_lookup(). This takes the incming packet match fields
    and compares them with that of the flow table entry's match fields.
```


Main Data Structures
====================
```
struct ofl_msg_flow_mod
    Represents the flow_mod message. It contains the msg header, cookie, idle
    & hard timeouts, priority, match fields and instructions.

struct flow_table
    Represents the flow table. It's present in every table. It contains the
    table features, statistics, a list for match, hard and idle entries. 
    i.e., the flows are classified into 3 categories: idle, hard and regular
    match entries. This facilitates correct aging.

struct flow_entry
    Represents the actual flow. It contains pointers to the dp, table, stats, 
    instructions and match fields.

```


Writing New OF Experimenters
============================
In OpenFlow v1.3.0, vendor extensions has been renamed as expeimenters. OFSS 
allows developers to write their own experimenters. As given in OpenFlow spec,
an experimenter message contains three important parameters as follows:

```
/* Experimenter extension. */
struct ofp_experimenter_header {
    struct ofp_header header;   /* Type OFPT_EXPERIMENTER   */
    uint32_t experimenter;      /* Experimenter ID          */
    uint32_t exp_type;          /* Experimenter defined     */
    
    /* Other experimenter-defined additional data.          */
};
OFP_ASSERT(sizeof(struct ofp_experimenter_header) == 16);
```

These routines can be registered at oflib-exp/ofl-exp.c file.

In OFSS, any experimenter has to register 4 routines with the dp engine and 
those routines will be called on the event of receiving a matching experimenter 
message. The routines are for:
    1. Message packing routine
    2. Message unpacking routine
    3. Message free routine
    4. Message to string routine


Experimenters Data Structure Design
-----------------------------------
All experimenter messages should have the standard ofp_header follwed by
experimenter ID and msg type. 

```
struct new_of_experimenter {
    struct ofp_header   header;     /* standard OF header       */
    uint32_t            vendor;     /* experimenter ID          */
    uint32_t            subtype;    /* experimenter msg type    */

    /* experimenter specific data */
};
```

Dpctl Specific
==============
Almost most of the functionality is in "utilities/dpctl.c" file.

The global "struct command" array holds all possible dpctl commands, their
arugument lengths and fucntion pointer to the command handler.

Adding a new command just requires command design, min and max number of args
and writing the handler code. Once done, add an entry to the global 
stuct command all_commands[] array.
